# 2. Classes and Objects

!!! abstract "Learning Objectives"

    - be familiar with how to create and use classes
    - understand the difference between classes and objects
    - see the relationship between classes and OOP

## Classes

Classes can be seen as blueprints for creating objects which are different instances of the same class. Classes allow us to define the common characteristics and behaviours of a group of related objects.

Take for instance, the wrapper classes like `String` in Java or `std::string` in C++, we have the stored data (the text string) and a bunch of methods which act on that data (e.g. `length()` returns the length of that string data). This is an abstraction and encapsulation like we've seen before, except that we can have different instances instead of being confined to a Singleton.

For instance:

```lua
-- CarClass.lua
local Car = {}
Car.__index = Car

function Car.new(color, speed)
    local self = setmetatable({}, Car)
    self.color = color
    self.speed = speed
    return self
end

function Car:Drive()
    print("The " .. self.color .. " car is driving at " .. self.speed .. " mph.")
end

return Car
```

Here, `Car.new` is the constructor that initializes a new object of class `Car` and returns it, and `Car:Drive` is a method available to all instances of the `Car` class.

## Objects

Objects are the concrete realization of a class. While a class defines the general structure and behaviour, an object represents a specific instance created from that class, with its own unique data.

For instance, we can create `Car` objects like this:

```lua
local Car = require(game.ServerScriptService.CarClass)

local redCar = Car.new("red", 60)
local blueCar = Car.new("blue", 80)

redCar:Drive() -- Outputs: "The red car is driving at 60 mph."
blueCar:Drive() -- Outputs: "The blue car is driving at 80 mph."
```

## Object-Oriented Programming

Object-oriented programming (OOP) is the programming paradigm based upon the concepts of objects in order to model our programming problems.

One way to look at OOP is as a mirror of our natural world, to break everything down into objects which have certain properties, exhibit certain behaviours, and allow certain actions.
