# 3. Booleans and Conditionals

!!! abstract "Learning Objectives"

    - be familiar with basic boolean logic in Lua
    - understand how to use conditional if-then-else statements
    - be familiar with common idioms for control flow

## Booleans

Booleans are simple: there are only two values, `true` and `false`. These are the building blocks for logic and flow control.

Lua provides basic comparison operators to compare values and return a boolean result:

- `==` (equals to)
- `~=` (not equals to)
- `>` (more than) and `>=` (more than or equal to)
- `<` (less than) and `<=` (less than or equal to)

```lua
local a = 2
local b = 3
print(a ~= b)    -- output: true
```

Lua also provides the three basic logical operators: `and`, `or`, and `not` to allow developers to chain together conditions to form more complex conditions. These operators behave exactly the same as in other languages.

```lua
print(true and false)   -- output: false
print(true or false)    -- output: true
print(not true)         -- output: false
```

## `if-then` statements

Lua `if-then` statements are used to control the flow of execution based on a condition, similarly to in other programming languages.

```lua
if condition then
    -- code to execute if condition is true
end
```

We can also add `elseif` and `else` blocks for when other conditions are true or when no conditions are true respectively.

```lua
if condition1 then
    -- code if condition1 is true
elseif condition2 then
    -- code if condition2 is true
else
    -- code if neither condition is true
end
```

!!! info "Truthy and Falsy"

    `false` and `nil` are considered falsy values and are coerced into false when used in conditions. Likewise, `true` and all other values (including 0 and "") are truthy and are coerced into true. This means that any value can be used as a condition since they all are coerced into booleans. However, incorrect usage may lead to logical errors sometimes.
    ```lua
    local winner = nil
    ...                 -- some code to find a possible winner
    if winner then      -- instead of "if winner ~= nil then"
        print("Winner is" .. winner)
    end
    ```
    If unsure, just be explicit and write out the full condition.

!!! info "One-Liner `if-then`"

    Lua lets us write one-liner `if-then` statements which lets us write terser code. For instance, we might use this in a function to return early if parameters passed are incorrect.
    ```lua
    function divide(num, denom)
        if denom == 0 then return end

    end
    ```

## Default values

Sometimes, it's useful to assign default values in case a variable is nil or doesn't meet a condition. This can be done in Lua using a common idiom:

```lua
local result = value or default
local character = player.Character or player:WaitForCharacter()
```

## Ternary statements

Ternary statements can also be written in Lua using another idiom:

```lua
local sign = x < 0 and "negative" or "positive"
```
