# 4. Tables and Loops

!!! abstract "Learning Objectives"

    - be familiar with Lua tables
    - understand the uses of metatables and metamethods
    - understand how to use `while` and `for` loops

## Tables as Associative Arrays

Tables in Lua are neither values nor variables but _objects_. The table type implements associative arrays, which are arrays that can be indexed by any value except `nil`.

Tables do not have a fixed size and can be changed dynamically. We use tables to represent ordinary arrays, dictionaries, sets, queues and other data structures. All tables are created with the `{}` _constructor expression_. Values are accessed and assigned with the `[]` operator.

```lua
-- creating a table of 3 elements indexed by 1,2
local a = {}
a[1] = "apples"
a[2] = "bananas"

-- accessing the 2nd element
print(a[2]) -- output: "bananas"
```

!!! failure "Common mistake"

    Unlike in other languages, accessing unset indexes returns `nil` instead of throwing errors
    ```lua
    local a = {}
    print(a[1000])  -- output: "nil"
    ```

## Arrays

Tables can be used as arrays simply by adding in values into the constructor. Note that tables in Lua are by default 1-indexed.

```lua
-- using constructors to create and initialize arrays in a single expression
local squares = {1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81}
```

!!! info "Changing index"

    We can also start an array at index 0, 1, or any other value by just manually setting indexes:

    ```lua
    -- starts at -5 and increments by 1 each index
    local squares = {[-5] = 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81}
    ```

    However, we recommend always starting arrays with index 1 to allow the Lua standard library functions to work properly.

## Dictionaries

Tables can also be used as dictionaries, allowing you to associate keys with values. These keys can be strings, numbers, or any other type except `nil`

```lua
-- using constructors to create and initialize dictionaries in a single expression
local shoppingList = {
    ["apples"] = 3,
    ["oranges"] = 4
}
```

If the keys are valid Lua identifiers (i.e. strings that are alphanumeric without spaces or special characters), we can omit the `[]` during table creation:

```lua
local shoppingListTwo = {
    apples = 3,
    oranges = 4
}
```

### Dot Syntax

Dictionaries with Lua identifier keys can be also be quickly indexed by the dot syntax as shorthand for accessing or modifying the table.

```lua
-- creating a table with string keys
local person = {name = "Alice", age = 25}
print(person.name)  -- output: "Alice"
person.age = 26     -- modifying person["age"]
```

## Metatables

Tables in Lua can have a special feature called metatables, which allow you to define custom behaviors for operations performed on the table. Metatables enable powerful features like operator overloading, handling undefined keys, and more.

### Setting a metatable

You can assign a metatable to a table using the `setmetatable` library function:

```lua
local t = {}
local mt = {}
setmetatable(t, mt)
```

### Metamethods

Metatables can define _metamethods_ - special fields that control the behaviour of a table. These are similar to dunder methods in Python. Common metamethods include:

- `__index` (define what happens when accessing a nonexistent key)
- `__newindex` (define what happens when assigning to a nonexistent key)
- `__add`, `__sub`, `__mul`, etc. (define how operators behave with the table)

For instance, here we use `__index` to provide a default value:

```lua
local point = {}
local defaults = {x = 0, y = 0}
local mt = {__index = defaults}
setmetatable(point, mt)

print(point.x, point.y) -- output: "0 0"
point.x = 10
print(point.x, point.y) -- output: "10 0"
```

We will later cover how to use metatables and metamethods to simulate classes and OOP-like behaviour in Lua.

## `for` loops

`for` loops are used to iterate over a finite sequence of numbers or values.

### Numeric `for` loop

Numeric `for` loop is used to iterate over a sequence of numbers, and it includes a start value, stop value, and optional step value (the increment per iteration)

```lua
for variable = start, stop, step do
    -- loop body
end
```

!!!info "Numerically iterating over arrays"

    We can use the numeric `for` loop to iterate over arrays, similar to how it would be done in other programming languages like so:
    ```lua
    for i in 1, #t do   -- #t returns the size of table t
        local v = t[i]  -- getting value at index i
        -- loop body
    end
    ```

### `ipairs`

`ipairs` is a standard library function which helps to iterate over a table until the first `nil` is found. We typically use it to traverse continuous arrays. It is the idiomatic way to traverse arrays in Lua.

```lua
-- iterate over every element in the array
for index, value in ipairs(t) do
    -- loop body
end
```

### `ipairs`

`pairs` is a standard library function which helps to iterate over all key-value pairs in a table. We typically use it to traverse dictionaries.

```lua
-- iterate over every key-value pair in the dictionary
for key, value in pairs(t) do
    -- loop body
end
```

!!!info "Generic `for` loops"

    Luau also has generic `for` loop syntactic sugar which automatically determines which standard library function, `ipairs` or `pairs`, to use when dealing with a table. It is the idiomatic way to traverse tables in Roblox.
    ```lua
    for x, value in t do -- x might be a key or index depending on the type of table
        -- loop body
    end
    ```

## `while` loops

`while` loops are used when you want to repeat execution of the loop body for as long as the condition stays true.

```lua
while condition do
    -- loop  body
end
```

## `repeat-until` loops

`repeat-until` loop is similar to a standard `while` loop except that that the loop body is guaranteed to be executed at least once, and repeated until the condition is reached

```lua
repeat
    -- loop body
until condition
```
